# 2015-02-18 -- The Limits of Talent

Sayings along the lines of Edison's "genius is 1% inspiration, 99% perspiration" are popular in a "you can do it if you only work hard enough" culture.
But experience suggests caveats.
Talent, the "1% inspiration" does carry people to a point.
Intellectual talent puts them at the top of their high school class, athletic talent atop the sports team, vocal talent leading the choir.

College hits, and many find the tide of talent failing them.
The blamed reasons are varied, but in many cases they amount to never having needed to work before.
Talent has suddenly failed not because they lack it, but because all of the others reaching that level have it as well.
What lacks is an ethic, a will to succeed through struggle and effort.

The teaching of ethics and morality requires the concurrent service of conflicting goals.
A well-adjusted person accepts or even reconciles nominal paradoxes, working around or with their implications.
Ex: lessons about work must at once instill two values: effort and results.
Many times the world cares not for failed effort; reports do not write themselves; jobs must be completed.
Simultaneously, results without effort tend to be viewed with suspicion in the adult world.
That which is done too quickly, too easily causes doubt. Was the task underestimated? Were corners cut?
Managers may feel mocked by the presentation of a simple solution too soon, if they had deemed the problem hard.

Praise effort that achieves results, while demuring about the results.
Yes, it may be correct. But the result is not _of_ the doer in the same guttural way as the _doing_.
Reinforce those acts, the mechanics of creation, and doer will be strengthened.
It may be that most are not geniuses, however pushing someone with that 1% inspiration might just be that last 1% or perspiration that they need to hit that "magic" formula.
